Jehovah is a Miracle Worker.
What’s a miracle?
How would you describe it?
Well, let’s give a simple definition.
A miracle is a powerful work
that can’t be explained in human terms.
Whenever Jehovah performs a miracle,
he has a purpose.
And one reason might be
to strengthen the faith of his servants.
And that’s the title of this talk,
“Jehovah’s Powerful Works Inspire Faith.”
Well, we love to consider
the miracles recorded in the Bible.
It’s really faith-strengthening, isn’t it?
So during this talk,
we’re going to consider just a few.
How about this one?
Jehovah leads the Israelites out of Egypt.
They arrive at the Red Sea,
and it seems they’re trapped.
The sea is ahead of them;
Pharaoh and his armies are behind.
But Jehovah causes
the waters of the Red Sea to part,
and the Israelites cross over on dry land.
When Pharaoh and his armies follow,
Jehovah brings the sea
back to its normal condition,
and the cream of the crop
of Egyptian manhood drowns.
Now, we know what effect
that miracle had on the Egyptians,
but what effect
did it have on the Israelites?
Let’s see.
Exodus 14:31
(I’ll give you a moment
so you can find that),
Exodus chapter 14
and verse 31—it says:
“Israel also saw the great power
“that Jehovah wielded against the Egyptians,
“and the people began to fear Jehovah
and to put faith in Jehovah.”
So that miracle
inspired faith in the Israelites.
Now, they weren’t the only ones
who were impressed by that miracle.
Let’s fast-forward 40 years.
Two spies enter Jericho and go
to the house of Rahab the prostitute.
And she says to them:
“We heard how Jehovah
“dried up the waters of the Red Sea . . .
“When we heard about it, we lost heart, . . .
“for Jehovah your God
is God in the heavens above
and on the earth beneath.”
Just hearing about that miracle
inspired faith in Rahab.
Now, another person whose faith was
strengthened by a powerful work
might surprise you:
the Queen of Sheba.
Well, the Queen of Sheba,
what was the powerful work?
Outstanding wisdom.
She’d heard about the wisdom of Solomon,
and her curiosity got the better of her.
She just had to see if the report was true.
And that involved a 1,200-mile trip
from her country to Jerusalem.
The trip turned out
to be well worth the effort.
At the end of the visit,
the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon:
“May Jehovah your God be praised,
who has taken pleasure in you
by putting you on the throne of Israel.”
She gave credit to Jehovah for what she saw.
Now, we don’t know if she ever
became a worshipper of Jehovah,
but Jesus said
that she’d ‘rise up in the judgment’
and “condemn” those Jews
who wouldn’t even cross the street
to listen to the Son of God.
Well, those are just two examples
and, as you know,
there are many more in the Bible.
The apostle Paul lists some of them
at Hebrews chapter 11,
and we’re going to read verses 32 to 34,
Hebrews chapter 11 (I’ll give you a moment),
verses 32-34.
And I’m going to read verse 32 first,
Hebrews 11:32 (have you got it?):
“And what more will I say?
“For time will fail me
if I go on to relate about Gideon,
“Barak, Samson, Jephthah,
David, as well as Samuel
and the other prophets.”
Now, as I read verses 33 and 34,
I want you children
to look at the events
that are being described
and see if you can guess who was involved.
Who was the object of this miracle?
So let’s read verse 33;
it says: “Through faith
“they defeated kingdoms,
“brought about righteousness,
obtained promises,
“stopped the mouths of lions,
“quenched the force of fire,
“escaped the edge of the sword,
“from a weak state were made powerful,
became mighty in war,
routed invading armies.”
Now, let’s go back and see
if we can identify individuals
who were involved in those miracles.
How about “defeated kingdoms”?
Did you come up with someone?
Let’s talk about Gideon.
Now, we like Gideon.
He reminds us of us.
He wasn’t exactly brimming with confidence.
When an angel approached him
and indicated that Jehovah
had work for him to do,
Gideon said:
“My clan is the least in Manasseh,
and I am the most insignificant
in my father’s house.”
He said something else,
something that has a bearing
on the theme of our discussion.
He said to the angel:
“If Jehovah is with us, . . .
where are all his wonderful acts
that our fathers related to us?”
Yes, where were the powerful works?
Before he was going to stick his neck out,
Gideon wanted some kind of reassurance
that he had Jehovah’s blessing.
What to do?
What was the angel going to do?
He performed a powerful work,
and that inspired faith in Gideon.
Later, Gideon’s confidence
was further boosted
by three other remarkable signs
—two involving a fleece
and another involving a God-given dream.
Now, with those powerful works
in mind and with Jehovah’s help,
Gideon did the impossible.
With 300 men,
he defeated an army of 135,000.
Well, now, what’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson for us?
With Jehovah on our side,
we are never outnumbered.
Let’s go back to verse 33.
Now, you children,
I’m sure you’re going to get this next one,
verse 33:
“stopped the mouths of lions.”
Who did that?
Well, it was the same one
who helped Gideon defeat the Midianites.
It was Jehovah.
But what was the circumstance?
Well, you know.
It was when Daniel
was thrown into the lions’ pit.
Now, when Daniel was condemned to die,
he didn’t know for sure
that Jehovah was going to rescue him.
But he knew that Jehovah
would do the right thing.
He could have that confidence because Jehovah
had been with him throughout his life.
Daniel had been condemned to die once before.
Now, wait a minute; let’s think about that.
When was that?
Well, it was when
the king of Babylon had a dream,
and he decreed that unless Daniel
and the other wise men of Babylon
could tell him what he dreamed
and then relate the meaning of the dream,
they would all be put to death.
That called for a powerful work.
Jehovah provided Daniel
with the information he needed,
and Daniel’s life was saved.
Well, that was Babylon.
Now we’re in Persia, and Daniel
is once more facing death—death by a lion.
And once again, Jehovah comes to the rescue.
He temporarily shuts
the mouths of those lions.
Well, we can imagine
what effect that had on Daniel.
But what about us today?
What’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson?
Today, Satan
is “[walking] about like a roaring lion,
seeking to devour someone.”
We may never know how often
Jehovah shuts the mouth of that lion
—how often Jehovah protects his people
as a group from Satan.
When we’re working from door to door,
for example.
It’s dangerous out there!
And we probably have no idea
how busy the angels are in our behalf.
And if someone does lose his life
while in Jehovah’s service or at a meeting
—and it has happened—
his loved ones can be sure of two things.
First of all,
their loved one did not
lose Jehovah’s approval.
And second, the loss is only temporary.
Satan can never do us any lasting harm.
One day Jehovah will shut
that lion’s mouth permanently.
Now, back to Hebrews 11,
and this time we’re reading verse 34,
and I’m sure you kids
are going to guess this one,
verse 34:
“quenched the force of fire.”
Of course!
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
They were court officials in Babylon.
And you’ll recall that one day,
King Nebuchadnezzar
made a huge image of gold
and demanded that everybody worship it.
Anyone who refused would be thrown
into the burning fiery furnace.
Well, that was a time to remember
Jehovah’s powerful works of the past.
And the three men had experienced that,
probably when they were just teenagers.
Can you think of how?
When they arrived in Babylon,
they were taken to the palace
for special training,
and they were told to eat whatever
was put in front of them.
In this case, some of the food
was prohibited under the Mosaic Law.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
refused to eat those foods,
and they asked to be given
vegetables and water instead.
Now, for some of you children,
just the thought of having
to eat vegetables all the time
is probably quite a test.
But now, think of the results of this diet.
After only 10 days,
the three young men
were in much better health
than those who had followed the king’s diet.
Now, if you’ve ever had to follow a diet,
you know that there’s no way
that you can show improvement
in just 10 days.
Jehovah had to have been involved.
Now they were facing death.
They knew their God.
They knew what he was capable of.
They told the king that if it
was the will of God, they would be rescued,
but if not, they still wouldn’t worship
the image of gold.
They knew that if Jehovah
chose not to intervene miraculously,
it was not a sign of his disapproval.
Well, you know what happened.
They were thrown into the fiery furnace,
but God sent his angel to protect them.
And when they stepped out of the furnace,
there wasn’t even the smell of fire on them.
Their integrity also resulted
in a great witness.
When the king saw
that they were alive and well,
he praised Jehovah; he said:
“Praised be the God of Shadrach,
“Meshach, and Abednego . . .
“There is no other god who is able to rescue
like this one.”
What a witness that gave!
Well, that’s what happened back then.
What’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson?
Today, many brothers are facing
the heat of adversity—Russia, for example.
Now, many brothers
have been given long prison sentences
because they won’t bow down to the state.
Now, Jehovah doesn’t prevent
this from happening
any more than he prevented
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
from being thrown into the furnace.
But he does help them.
What do we notice about them
as they’re being led off to prison?
They’re smiling.
They’re serene.
They’re at peace.
They know their God.
And when they come out, there won’t
even be the smell of fire on them.
Their faith will be intact.
Their fine conduct also results
in a good witness to the jailers
and others who hear about the persecution.
Well, we’ll take one more example
in verse 34:
“escaped the edge of the sword.”
I was thinking of Elisha.
Now, in the days of the prophet Elisha,
the king of Syria went to war against Israel,
and he called a war council,
and the Syrians
secretly planned their strategy.
But Jehovah kept telling Elisha
what the Syrians were up to,
and Elisha kept telling the king of Israel.
The Syrians were furious,
and the king sent a large army
to capture Elisha.
What ingratitude!
Why do we say that?
Because in the previous chapter,
we read that Elisha
had cured the leprosy of Naaman,
a chief of the Syrian army, and now
a large Syrian army was hunting Elisha down.
We hope Naaman wasn’t among them.
Finally, the Syrians found
the city where Elisha was,
and they surrounded it.
Elisha’s attendant was scared to death,
but Elisha wasn’t afraid.
Second Kings chapter 6,
verses 16, 17 explains why.
This is encouraging—faith-strengthening.
Let’s look it up—2 Kings chapter 6,
verses 16, 17.
Now, this is Elisha talking to his attendant:
“‘Do not be afraid!
“‘For there are more who are with us
“than those who are with them.’
“Then Elisha began to pray and say:
“‘O Jehovah, open his eyes,
please, that he may see.’
“Immediately Jehovah opened
the attendant’s eyes and he saw,
“and look! the mountainous region
“was full of horses and war chariots of fire
all around Elisha.”
Well, that was a miraculous occurrence.
That was faith-strengthening indeed.
What’s the takeaway?
What’s the lesson for us?
Well, one day we’ll be faced
with hosts of modern-day Syrians.
What’s going to help us
to remain calm, unafraid?
We’ll look heavenward
and with our eyes of faith,
we’ll see myriads
of angels encamped all around us.
We know that Jehovah will do the right thing,
whatever is in harmony with his will.
I hear you say: “I’d like to see a miracle.
That would help a lot
to strengthen my faith.”
We see miracles every day.
What’s a miracle?
It’s a powerful work
that can’t be explained in human terms.
A modern example of that is prayer.
Isn’t prayer amazing?
Can you explain it?
Jehovah can listen to millions
of prayers in any language all at once.
That’s a miracle!
But how does prayer build our faith?
When we pray about a problem
that nobody but Jehovah knows about
and our prayer is answered,
our faith is strengthened.
Now, that is powerful.
And what about all the experiences we hear
when someone desperately prayed to God:
“If you exist, please send someone
to teach me about you”
and ten minutes later,
a Witness knocks on the door?
Coincidence or a miracle?
Another miracle: our Christian brotherhood
—isn’t it remarkable?
Who can explain it?
Former enemies become fast friends.
You can go to a Kingdom Hall
anywhere in the world
and you will find your brothers and sisters.
They’ll be glad to see you.
You’ll feel at ease.
You’ll know what they believe and what
they’ll be studying at the meetings.
You’ll see and feel the love.
In times of ethnic cleansing,
how often do we read
of brothers and sisters who risk their lives
to hide fellow believers who happen
to be from another tribe?
You know, when I think
of a loving brotherhood,
I always think of the experience
Jack Johansson related in his life story.
Brother Johansson
was a missionary serving in Malawi
at a time when the country was experiencing
tremendous political unrest and violence.
Now, he and a young African brother
set out to check on
the welfare of Witnesses
in another part of the country.
But along the way, they encountered
a soldier who wasn’t friendly.
He said to the African brother,
“I have to shoot the white man.”
He was serious.
As he raised his gun to fire,
the young African brother thrust himself
between the gunman
and Brother Johansson and said:
“Shoot me!
Shoot me, instead!”
Well, that soldier was so touched
by the love of our young African brother,
that he put his gun down.
When you hear experiences like that,
it makes you proud
to be part of Jehovah’s organization.
Why is it that Jehovah
is gathering us into an organization?
There’s an interesting detail recorded
at Isaiah 43:10.
I’d like you to look it up.
Now, when you hear Isaiah 43:10,
you say: “I know that.
It’s about ‘“You are my witnesses,”
says Jehovah.’”
And that’s true.
But we’re going to focus
on another part of the verse.
So Isaiah 43:10:
“‘You are my witnesses,’ declares Jehovah,
“‘Yes, my servant whom I have chosen,
“‘[now notice this] so that you may know
and have faith in me.’”
Before we can have faith in Jehovah,
we have to get to know him.
We have to learn about his powerful works,
those past and those present.
And as we study his dealings
with his people in the past,
we see that Jehovah
always keeps his promises.
He’s promised to bring
about a righteous new world.
Now, we can take that promise to the bank.
And through prayer and association
with his organization,
we can experience the modern-day miracles
that Jehovah is performing.
The more we know about Jehovah,
the more we’ll love him.
The more we love him,
the more we’ll want to tell others about him.
The more we preach,
the stronger our faith will become,
and we will be made powerful by faith.